



The Mahabharata

of

Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa

BOOK 8

Karna-parva



Translated into English Prose from the Original Sanskrit Text

by

Kisari Mohan Ganguli

[1883-1896]

Scanned and Proofed by Mantra Caitanya. Additional proofing and
formatting at sacred-texts.com, by J. B. Hare, October 2003.





1

Om! Having bowed down unto Narayana, and unto that most exalted of male
beings, Nara, and unto the goddess Sarasvati also, must the word Jaya be
uttered.

Vaishampayana said, "After Drona had been slain, O monarch, the royal
warriors (of the Kaurava army) headed by Duryodhana, with hearts filled
with great anxiety, all repaired to Drona's son. Lamenting the loss of
Drona, and deprived of energy in consequence of their cheerlessness, they
sat around the son of Sharadvata's daughter, afflicted with grief.
Comforted for a little while by considerations founded upon the
scriptures, when night came, those rulers of Earth proceeded to their
respective tents. Those lords of Earth, however, O thou of Kuru's race,
could feel no happiness in their abodes. Thinking of that immense
slaughter, they could not also sleep. The Suta's son (Karna), and king
Suyodhana and Duhshasana and Shakuni, in special, could not compose
themselves to sleep. Those four passed that night together in
Duryodhana's tent, reflecting upon the woes they had inflicted upon the
high-souled Pandavas. Formerly they had brought Draupadi, plunged into
woe on account of the match at dice, into the assembly. Recollecting it
they experienced great regret, their hearts being filled with anxiety.
Thinking of those sufferings inflicted (upon the Pandavas) in consequence
of the gambling match they passed that night in sorrow, O king, as if it
were really a hundred years. Then when morning came, observing the
dictates of the ordinance, all of them duly went through the customary
rites. Having gone through these customary rites, and comforted to some
extent, O Bharata, they ordered their troops to be arrayed, and then came
out for battle, having made Karna their generalissimo by tying the
auspicious thread round his wrists, and having caused many foremost of
brahmanas, by presents of vessels of curds, clarified butter, akshatas,
coins of gold, kine, jewels and gems, and costly robes, to pray for their
victory, and having caused heralds and musicians, and panegyrists to
adore them with hymns about victory. The Pandavas also, O king, having
gone through their morning rites, issued from their camp, resolved on
battle. Then commenced a fierce battle, making the hair to stand on end,
between the Kurus and the Pandavas, each desirous of vanquishing the
other. During the commandership of Karna, the battle that took place
between the Kuru and the Pandava troops was exceedingly fierce and lasted
for two days. Then Vrisha (Karna) having made an immense slaughter of his
enemies in battle, was at last slain in the sight of the Dhartarashtras,
by Arjuna. Then Sanjaya, repairing to Hastinapura told Dhritarashtra all
that had happened at Kurujangala."

Janamejaya said, "Having heard of the fall of Bhishma and that other
mighty car-warrior, Drona, the old king Dhritarashtra the son of Ambika
had been afflicted with great grief. How, O foremost of brahmanas, could
he, plunged into grief, support his life having heard of the death of
Karna, that well-wisher of Duryodhana? How indeed, could that descendant
of Kuru support his life when he, upon whom that monarch had rested the
hope of his sons' victory, had fallen? When the king did not lay down his
life even after hearing of Karna's death, I think that it is very
difficult for men to yield up life even under circumstances of great
grief! O brahmana, when the king did not yield up his life after hearing
of the fall of the venerable son of Shantanu, of Bahlika and Drona and
Somadatta and Bhurishrava, as also other friends and his sons and
grandsons, I think, O regenerate one, that the act of yielding up one's
life is exceedingly difficult! Tell me all these in detail and as they
actually happened! I am not satiated with hearing the high achievements
of my ancestors!"



2

Vaishampayana said, "Upon the fall of Karna, O monarch, the son of
Gavalgana, with a cheerless heart, set out that night for Nagapura, on
steeds that rivalled the wind in speed. Arrived at Hastinapura, with a
heart filled with deep anxiety, he proceeded to Dhritarashtra's abode
which no longer teemed with kinsmen and friends. Beholding the king
deprived of all energy by grief, joining his hands he worshipped, with a
bend of his head, the monarch's feet. Having duly worshipped king
Dhritarashtra, he uttered an exclamation of woe and then began, 'I am
Sanjaya, O lord of Earth! Art thou not happy? I hope thou art not
stupefied, having through thy own faults fallen into such distress?
Counsels for thy good had been uttered by Vidura and Ganga's son and
Keshava. I hope thou feelest no pain now, remembering thy rejection of
those counsels? Counsels for thy good had also been uttered in the
assembly by Rama and Narada and Kanwa and others. I hope thou feelest no
pain now, remembering their rejection by thee? I hope thou feelest no
pain, remembering the slaughter in battle, by the foe, of Bhishma and
Drona and others, those friends that were ever engaged in thy good?' Unto
the Suta's son who with joined hands was telling him so, the monarch
afflicted with grief and drawing a long and hot breath, said these words.

"Dhritarashtra said, 'Hearing, O Sanjaya, of the fall of the heroic son
of Ganga, that warrior of all celestial weapons, as also of the fall of
that foremost of all bowmen, Drona, my heart feeleth great pain! That
hero endued with great energy and born of the Vasus themselves, who slew
every day 10,000 car-warriors clad in mail, that high-souled one unto
whom Bhrigu's son had given the highest weapons, that warrior who in his
childhood had been trained in the science of the bow by Rama, alas, even
he hath been slain by Yajnasena's son Shikhandi protected by the
Pandavas! At this my heart is greatly pained! That hero through whose
grace those mighty car-warriors, the royal sons of Kunti, as also many
other lords of Earth, have become maharathas, alas, hearing of the
slaughter of that great bowman of sure aim, Drona, by Dhrishtadyumna, my
heart is exceedingly pained! Those two had not in the world a person
equal to them in (knowledge and use of) the four kinds of weapons! Alas,
hearing of the slaughter of these two, Bhishma and Drona, in battle my
heart is exceedingly pained! That warrior who had not in the three worlds
a person equal to him in knowledge of weapons, alas, hearing of the
slaughter of that hero, Drona, what did the people of my side do? After
the high-souled son of Pandu, Dhananjaya, exerting himself with prowess,
had despatched unto Yama's abode the strong force of the samsaptakas,
after the Narayana weapon of the intelligent son of Drona had been
baffled, and after the (Kaurava) divisions had begun to fly away, what,
indeed, did the people of my side do? I think that, after Drona's death
my troops, flying away and sinking in an ocean of grief, resembled
shipwrecked mariners struggling on the bosom of the vast deep. What also,
O Sanjaya, became the colour of the faces of Duryodhana, and Karna, and
Kritavarma the chief of the Bhojas and Shalya, the ruler of the Madras,
and of my remaining sons, and of the others, when the Kuru divisions fled
away from the field? Tell me all this as it truly happened in battle, O
son of Gavalgana, and describe to me the prowess put forth by the
Pandavas and the warriors of my side!"

"Sanjaya said, 'O sire, hearing all that has happened unto the Kauravas
through thy fault, thou shouldst not feel any anguish! He that is wise
never feeleth any pain at what Destiny bringeth! And since Destiny is
unconquerable, human purposes may or may not become attainable. Hence, he
that is wise never feeleth pain on the acquisition or the reverse of the
objects cherished by him.

"Dhritarashtra said, 'I do not feel great pain, O Sanjaya! I regard all
this to be the result of Destiny! Tell me all that thou wishest!'"



3

"Sanjaya said, 'Upon the fall of the great bowman Drona, thy sons, those
mighty car-warriors, became pale and deprived of their senses. Armed with
weapons, all of them, O monarch, hung down their heads. Afflicted with
grief and without looking at one another, they stood perfectly silent.
Beholding them with such afflicted countenances, thy troops, O Bharata,
themselves perturbed by grief, vacantly gazed upwards. Seeing Drona slain
in battle, the weapons of many of them, O king, dyed with blood, dropped
from their hands. Innumerable weapons, again, O Bharata, still retained
in the grasp of the soldiers, seemed in their pendent attitude, to
resemble falling meteors in the sky. Then king Duryodhana, O monarch,
beholding that army of thine thus standing as if paralysed and lifeless,
said, "Relying upon the might of your army I have summoned the Pandavas
to battle and caused this passage-at-arms to commence! Upon the fall of
Drona, however, the prospect seems to be cheerless. Warriors engaged in
battle all die in battle. Engaged in battle, a warrior may have either
victory or death. What can be strange then in this (viz., the death of
Drona)? Fight ye with faces turned towards every direction. Behold now
the high-souled Karna, the son of Vikartana, that great bowman of mighty
strength, careering in battle, using his celestial weapons! Through fear
of that warrior in battle, that coward, viz., Dhananjaya, the son of
Kunti, always turns back like a small deer at the sight of a lion! It is
he who, by the ordinary methods of human battle, brought the mighty
Bhimasena endued with the strength of 10,000 elephants to that plight! It
is he who, uttering a loud roar, slew with his invincible dart the brave
Ghatotkaca of a 1,000 illusions and well-acquainted with celestial
weapons! Behold today the inexhaustible might of arms of that intelligent
warrior of sure aim and invincible energy! Let the sons of Pandu behold
today the prowess of both Ashvatthama and Karna resembling that of Vishnu
and Vasava! All of you are singly able to slay the sons of Pandu with
their troops in battle! How much more then are you capable, when united
together, of that feat! Endued with great energy and accomplished in
weapons, you will today behold one another engaged in the achievement of
mighty tasks!'"

"Sanjaya continued, 'Having said these words, O sinless one, thy son
Duryodhana, with his brothers, made Karna the generalissimo (of the Kuru
army). Obtaining the command, the mighty car-warrior Karna, so fierce in
battle, uttered loud roars and fought with the foe. He caused, O sire, a
great carnage among the Srinjayas, the Pancalas, the Kekayas, and the
Videhas. From his bow issued innumerable lines of arrows, one close
behind the wings of another, like flights of bees. Having afflicted the
Pancalas and the Pandavas endued with great activity, and slain thousands
of warriors, he was at last slain by Arjuna!"



4

Vaishampayana said, "Hearing this intelligence, O monarch, Dhritarashtra
the son of Ambika, feeling the acme of grief, regarded Suyodhana to be
already dead. Exceedingly agitated, the king fell down on the Earth like
an elephant deprived of its senses. When that foremost of the monarchs,
greatly agitated, fell down on the Earth, loud wails were uttered, O best
of the Bharatas, by the ladies (of the royal household). That noise was
so loud that it seemed to fill the entire Earth. Immersed in a deep ocean
of woe, the Bharata ladies, with hearts exceedingly agitated and scorched
by grief, wept aloud. Approaching the king, Gandhari, O bull of Bharata's
race, and the other ladies of the household, all fell down on the earth,
deprived of their senses. Then Sanjaya, O king, began to comfort those
ladies stricken with grief, bathed in tears, and reft of consciousness.
Comforted (by Sanjaya), those ladies began to tremble repeatedly like a
plantain grove shaken by the wind. Vidura also, sprinkling that
descendant of Kuru with water, began to comfort the puissant monarch who
had knowledge only for his eye. Slowly restored to consciousness, and
understanding that the ladies of the household were there, the king, O
monarch, remained perfectly silent for some time like one reft of reason.
Having reflected then for some time, and repeatedly drawn long breaths,
the king censured his own sons and applauded the Pandavas. Censuring also
his own intelligence and that of Shakuni the son of Subala, the king,
having reflected for a long time, began to tremble repeatedly.
Controlling his mind once more, the king, with sufficient fortitude,
questioned his charioteer Sanjaya the son of Gavalgana.

"Dhritarashtra said, 'I have heard, O Sanjaya, all that thou hast said.
Hath my son Duryodhana, O Suta, who is ever desirous of victory, already
gone to Yama's abode, despairing of success? Tell me truly, O Sanjaya,
all this even if thou wilt have to repeat it!'"

Vaishampayana continued, "Thus addressed by the king, O Janamejaya, the
Suta said unto him, 'The mighty car-warrior Vaikartana, O monarch, hath
been slain with his sons and brothers, and other Suta warriors, all of
whom were mighty bowmen ready to lay down their lives in battle!
Duhshasana also hath been slain by the renowned son of Pandu. Indeed, his
blood also hath been, from wrath, drunk by Bhimasena in battle!'"



5

Vaishampayana said, "Hearing these words, O monarch, Ambika's son
Dhritarashtra, with heart agitated by grief, addressed his driver
Sanjaya, saying, 'Though the evil policy, O sire, of my son of little
foresight, Vikartana's son hath been slain! This intelligence is cutting
the very core of my heart! I am desirous of crossing this sea of grief!
Remove my doubts, therefore, by telling me who are still alive and who
are dead amongst the Kurus and the Pandavas!'

"Sanjaya said, 'Endued with great prowess and invincible in battle,
Bhishma the son of Shantanu, O king, having slain large numbers of
Srinjayas and Pancalas, hath been slain after ten days. The mighty and
invincible bowman Drona of the golden car, having slaughtered the Pancala
divisions in battle, hath been slain. Having slaughtered the half of what
remained after the carnage by Bhishma and the illustrious Drona,
Vikartana's son Karna hath been slain. Endued with great strength, O
monarch, prince Vivingsati, having slain hundreds of Anarta warriors in
battle, hath been slain. Thy heroic son Vikarna, deprived of steeds and
weapons, stood, facing the foe, remembering the duties of Kshatriyas.
Remembering the many foul wrongs inflicted upon him by Duryodhana, and
bearing in mind his own vow, Bhimasena hath slain him. Possessed of great
might, Vinda and Anuvinda, the two princes of Avanti, after achieving the
most difficult feats, have gone to Yama's abode. That hero who had under
his sway ten kingdoms, having Sindhu for their chief, him who was ever
obedient to thee, Jayadratha of mighty energy, O king, Arjuna hath slain
after vanquishing eleven akshauhinis of troops with his keen arrows.
Endued with great activity and incapable of being easily defeated in
battle, the son of Duryodhana, ever obedient to his sire's commands, hath
been slain by the son of Subhadra. The brave son of Duhshasana, possessed
of mighty arms and fierce in battle, hath been despatched to Yama's abode
by Draupadi's son exerting himself with great prowess! The ruler of the
Kiratas and other dwellers of the lowlands on the seacoast, the much
respected and dear friend of the chief of the celestials himself, the
virtuous king Bhagadatta, who was ever devoted to Kshatriya duties, hath
been despatched to Yama's abode by Dhananjaya exerting himself great with
prowess. The kinsman of the Kauravas, the son of Somadatta, the brave and
celebrated Bhurishrava, O king, hath been slain by Satyaki in battle. The
Amvashtha king Srutayus, that foremost of Kshatriyas, who used to career
in battle most fearlessly, hath been slain by Arjuna. Thy son Duhshasana,
accomplished in arms and invincible in battle, and who was always
wrathful, hath, O monarch, been slain by Bhimasena. Sudakshina, O king,
who had many thousands of wonderful elephants, hath been slain in battle
by Arjuna. The ruler of the Kosolas, having slain many hundreds of foes,
hath himself been despatched to Yama's abode by Subhadra's son exerting
himself with prowess. Having fought with many thousands of foes and with
the mighty car-warrior Bhimasena himself, thy son Citrasena hath been
slain by Bhimasena. The brave younger brother of the ruler of the Madras,
that enhancer of the fears of foes, that handsome warrior armed with
sword and shield, hath been slain by Subhadra's son. He who was equal to
Karna himself in battle, Karna's son Vrishasena, accomplished in arms, of
mighty energy and steady prowess, hath, in the very sight of Karna, been
despatched to Yama's abode by Dhananjaya who put forth his prowess
remembering the slaughter of his own son Abhimanyu and bearing in mind
the vow he had made. That lord of Earth, Srutayus, who always displayed a
deep-rooted antipathy towards the Pandavas, hath been slain by Partha who
reminded him of that antipathy before taking his life. Shalya's son of
great prowess, O sire, Rukmaratha, hath, O king, been slain in battle by
Sahadeva although the former happened to be the latter's brother, having
been the son of the latter's maternal uncle. The old king Bhagiratha, and
Vrihatkshatra the ruler of the Kaikeyas both endued with great prowess
and might and energy, have been slain. Bhagadatta's son, O king who was
possessed of great wisdom and great strength, hath been slain by Nakula
who always careers in battle with the activity of the hawk. Thy grandsire
Bahlika, possessed of great might and prowess, hath, with all his
followers, been slain by Bhimasena. The mighty Jayatsena the son of
Jarasandha, the prince of the Magadhas, O king, hath been slain in battle
by the high-souled son of Subhadra. Thy son Durmukha, O king, as also thy
other son Dussaha, that mighty car-warrior, both of whom were regarded as
heroes, have been slain by Bhimasena with his mace. Durmarshana and
Durvisaha and the mighty car-warrior Durjaya, having achieved the most
difficult feats, have gone to Yama's abode. The two brothers Kalinga and
Vrishaka, who were invincible in battle, having achieved very difficult
feats have gone to Yama's abode. Thy counsellor Vrishavarman of the Suta
caste, endued with great energy, hath been despatched to Yama's abode by
Bhimasena exerting himself with prowess. So also king Paurava who was
endued with the might of 10,000 elephants, hath, with all his followers,
been slain by Pandu's son Arjuna. The Vasatis, O king, numbering 2,000,
effectual smiters of all, as also the Surasenas endued with prowess, have
all been slain in battle. The Abhishahas, clad in mail, capable of
smiting effectually, and fierce in battle, also the Sivis, those foremost
of car-warriors, with the Kalingas, have all been slain. Those other
heroes also, (the Narayana Gopas) who live and grew in Gokula, who were
exceedingly wrathful in battle, and who never retreated from the field
have been slain by Savyasaci. Many thousands of Srenis, as also the
samsaptakas, approaching Arjuna, have all repaired to the abode of Yama.
Thy two brothers-in-law, viz., the princes Vrishaka and Achala, who were
endued with great prowess, have for thy sake been slain by Savyasaci.
King Shalva of mighty arms and fierce deeds, who was a great bowman both
in name and feats, hath been slain by Bhimasena. Oghavat, O king, and
Vrishanta, fighting together in battle and exerting themselves with great
vigour for the sake of their ally, have both repaired to Yama's abode. So
also that foremost of car-warriors, viz., Kshemadhurti, O monarch, hath
been slain in battle by Bhimasena with his mace. So also that great
bowman, viz., the mighty king Jalasandha, after causing an immense
carnage, hath been slain by Satyaki in battle. That prince of Rakshasas,
viz., Alayudha, unto whose vehicle were yoked asses (of monstrous shape)
hath been despatched to Yama's abode by Ghatotkaca exerting himself with
great prowess. Radha's son of the Suta caste, and those mighty
car-warriors who were his brothers, and the Kaikeyas, the Malavas, the
Madrakas the Dravidas of fierce prowess, the Yaudheyas, the Lalittyas,
the Kshudrakas, the Usinaras, the Tundikeras, the Savitriputras, the
Easterners, the Northerners, the Westerners, and the Southerners, O sire,
have all been slain by Savyasaci. Large bands of foot-soldiers, myriads
upon myriads of steeds, large number of car-warriors, and many huge
elephants, have been slain. Many heroes also, with standards and weapons,
and with armour and attire and ornaments, and endued with perseverance
and possessed of high birth and good conduct, have been slain in battle
by Partha who is never fatigued with exertion. Others, endued with
immeasurable might, and desirous of slaying their foes, (have met with a
similar fate). These and many other kings, numbering thousands, with
their followers, have, O monarch, been slain in battle. That which thou
askest me I am answering now. Even thus did the destruction take place
when Arjuna and Karna fought. Even as Mahendra slew Vritra, and Rama slew
Ravana; even as Krishna slew Naraka or Mura in battle; even as the mighty
Rama of Bhrigu's race slew the heroic Kartavirya, invincible in battle,
with all his kinsmen and friends, after fighting a terrible battle
celebrated through the three worlds; even as Skanda slew (the Asura)
Mahisha, and Rudra slew (the Asura) Andhaka, even so hath Arjuna, O king,
in single combat, slain, with all his kinsmen, that foremost of smiters,
viz., Karna, who was invincible in battle and upon whom the
Dhartarashtras had placed their hopes of victory, and who was the great
cause of the hostility with the Pandavas! Pandu's son hath now
accomplished that which at one time thou couldst not believe him capable
of accomplishing, although, O monarch, well-meaning friends failed not to
apprise thee of it. That calamity, fraught with great destruction, hath
now come! Thou, O king wishing them well, hast heaped those evils on the
heads of thy covetous sons! The fruit of those evils is now manifesting
itself!'"



6

"Dhritarashtra said, 'Thou hast, O son, mentioned the names of those of
my side that have been slain in battle by the Pandavas. Tell me now, O
Sanjaya, the names of those amongst the Pandavas that have been slain by
the people of my side!'

"Sanjaya said, 'The Kuntis possessed of great prowess in battle, endued
with great energy and great might, have been slain in fight by Bhishma,
with all their kinsmen and advisers. The Narayanas, the Valabhadras, and
hundreds of other heroes, all devoted (to the Pandavas) have been slain
in battle by the heroic Bhishma. Satyajit, who was equal to the
diadem-decked Arjuna himself in battle as regards energy and might, hath
been slain in battle by Drona of sure aim. Many mighty bowmen among the
Pancalas, all of whom were skilled in battle, encountering Drona, have
repaired to Yama's abode. So the two kings Virata and Drupada, both
venerable in years, who exerted themselves with great prowess for their
ally, have, with their sons, been slain in battle by Drona. That
invincible hero, viz., Abhimanyu, who, though a child in years, was still
equal in battle to Arjuna or Keshava or Baladeva, O lord, that, warrior
who was highly accomplished in battle, after making an immense slaughter
of the foe, was at last encompassed by six foremost of car-warriors and
slain by them. Unable to resist Arjuna himself, they thus slew Arjuna's
son! Deprived of his car, that hero, viz., the son of Subhadra, still
stayed in battle, remembering the duties of a Kshatriya. At last, O king,
Duhshasana's son slew him on the field. The slayer of the Patachchatras,
viz., the handsome son of Amvashtha, surrounded by a large force, had put
forth all his prowess for the sake of his allies. Having made a great
slaughter among the foe, he was encountered by Duryodhana's son, the
brave Lakshmana, in battle and despatched to Yama's abode. The mighty
bowman Vrihanta, accomplished in arms and invincible in battle, hath been
despatched to Yama's abode by Duhshasana, exerting himself with great
prowess. The two kings Manimat and Dandadhara, both of whom were
invincible in battle and had put forth their prowess for their allies,
have been slain by Drona. Ansumat the ruler of the Bhojas, that mighty
car-warrior at the head of his own forces, hath been despatched to Yama's
abode by Drona exerting himself with great prowess. Citrasena, the ruler
of the sea-coast, with his son, O Bharata, hath been forcibly despatched
by Samudrasena to Yama's abode. Another ruler of a maritime country,
viz., Nila, and Vyaghradatta of great energy, have both, O king, been
despatched to Yama's abode by Ashvatthama. Citrayudha and Citrayodhin,
after making a great slaughter, have both been slain in battle by Vikarna
exerting himself with great prowess and displaying diverse manoeuvres of
his car. The chief of the Kaikeyas, who was equal to Vrikodara himself in
battle and surrounded by Kaikeya warriors, has been slain by Kaikeya, the
brother by the brother. Janamejaya of the hilly country, endued with
great prowess and accomplished in encounters with the mace, hath, O king,
been slain by thy son Durmukha. Those two foremost of men, viz., the
brothers Rochamana, like two brilliant planets, have together been
despatched to heaven by Drona with his shafts. Many other kings, O
monarch, endued with great prowess, have fought (for the Pandavas) Having
achieved the most difficult feats, all of them have gone to Yama's abode.
Purujit and Kuntibhoja, the two maternal uncles of Savyasaci, have been
despatched by Drona with shafts to such regions as are attained by death
in battle. Abhibhu the Kasis, at the head of many of his followers, hath
been obliged by Vasudana's son to lay down his life in battle. Yudhamanyu
of immeasurable prowess, and Uttamauja of great energy, after slaying
hundreds of heroic warriors, have themselves been slain by our men. The
Pancala prince Mitravarman, O Bharata, those two foremost of bowmen, have
been despatched to Yama's abode by Drona. Shikhandi's son Kshatradeva,
that foremost of warriors, possessed of great bravery, hath, O king, been
slain by thy grandson Lakshmana, O sire! The two heroes Sucitra and
Citravarman, who were sire and son and endued with great might, and who
careered fearlessly in battle, have been slain by Drona. Vardhakshemi, O
monarch, who was like the ocean at full tide, having had his weapons
exhausted in battle, hath at last obtained undisturbed peace. That
foremost of Sutas, viz., Senavindu, having consumed many foes in battle,
hath, at last, O king been slain by Bahlika. Dhrishtaketu, O monarch,
that foremost of car-warriors among the Cedis, after accomplishing the
most difficult feats, hath repaired to the abode of Yama. Similarly, the
heroic Satyadhriti, endued with great prowess, having made a great
slaughter in battle for the sake of the Pandavas, has been despatched to
Yama's abode. That lord of Earth, viz., Suketu, the son of Shishupala,
having slain many foes, hath at last been slain by Drona in battle.
Virata's son Sankha, as also Uttara of great strength, having
accomplished the most difficult feats, have repaired to Yama's abode.
Similarly, Satyadhriti of the Matsyas, and Madiraswa of great energy, and
Suryadatta possessed of great prowess, have all been slain by Drona with
his shafts. Srenimat also, O monarch, having fought with great prowess
and accomplished the most difficult feats, hath repaired to Yama's abode.
Similarly, the chief of the Magadhas, that slayer of hostile heroes,
endued with great energy and acquainted with the highest weapons,
sleepeth on the field of battle, slain by Bhishma. Vasudana also, having
made an immense carnage in battle, has been despatched to Yama's abode by
Bharadwaja's son exerting himself with great prowess. These and many
other mighty car-warriors of the Pandavas have been slain by Drona
exerting himself with great energy. I have now told them all that thou
hadst asked me.'"



7

"Dhritarashtra said, 'When all the foremost of my warriors, O Sanjaya
have perished, I do not think that the remnant of my army will not
perish! When those two heroes, those two mighty bowmen, those two
foremost of the Kurus, Bhishma and Drona, have been slain, what use can I
any longer have with life? I cannot also brook the death of Radha's son,
that ornament of battle, the might of whose arms was as great as that of
10,000 elephants! O foremost of speakers, tell me now, O Suta, who are
yet alive in my army after the death of all the foremost heroes! Thou
hast told me the names of those that have fallen. It seems, however, to
me that those who are still alive are almost all dead!'

"Sanjaya said, 'That hero O king, to whom Drona, that foremost of
brahmanas, imparted many blazing, celestial, and mighty weapons of the
four kinds, that mighty car-warrior, possessed of skill and lightness of
hands, that hero of firm grasp, strong weapons, and powerful shafts, that
high-souled son of Drona, capable of shooting to a great distance, is
still on the field, desirous of battling for thy sake. That dweller of
the Anarta country, that son of Hridika, that mighty car-warrior, that
foremost one among the Satwatas, that chief of the Bhojas, Kritavarma,
accomplished in arms, is on the field, desirous of battle. Artayana's
son, dauntless in battle, that first of warriors, that foremost of all
yet on thy side, he, that abandoned his own sister's sons, the Pandavas,
for making his own words true, that hero endued with great activity who
promised in the presence of Yudhishthira that he would in battle depress
the proud spirit of Karna, that invincible Shalya, who is equal unto
Sakra himself in energy, is still on the field, desirous of battling for
thy sake. Accompanied by his own force consisting of Ajaneyas,
Saindhavas, mountaineers, dwellers of riparian regions, Kambojas, and
Vanayus, the king of the Gandharas stayeth on the field, desirous of
battling for thy sake. Sharadvata's son called Gautama, O king, endued
with mighty arms and capable of fighting with diverse weapons in diverse
beautiful ways, taking up a beautiful and large bow capable of bearing
great strain, stayeth on the field, desirous of battle. That mighty
car-warrior, the son of the ruler of the Kaikeyas, riding on a goodly car
equipped with standard and goodly steeds, stayeth on the field, O chief
of Kuru's race, for battling for thy sake. Thy son also, that foremost of
heroes in Kuru's race, Purumitra, O king, riding on his car possessed of
the effulgence of fire or the Sun, stayeth on the field, like the Sun
himself shining brilliantly in the cloudless firmament. Duryodhana also,
endued with great energy, in the midst of an elephant force and
accompanied by many foremost of combatants, stayeth on his car adorned
with gold, desirous of engaging in battle. In the midst of many kings,
that foremost of men, possessed of the splendour of a lotus, looked
resplendent in his beautiful armour of gold like a fire with little smoke
or the Sun emerged from the clouds. So also thy sons Sushena, armed with
sword and shield, and the heroic Satyasena, are staying with Citrasena,
their hearts full of joy and themselves desirous of battle. Endued with
modesty, the Bharata princes Citrayudha, Srutavarman, and Jaya, Dala, and
Satyavrata, and Dussala, all of whom are possessed of great might, stay
on the field, desirous of battle. The ruler of the Kaitavyas, that prince
proud of his courage, and capable of fearlessly careering in battle and
slaying his foes, possessing foot-soldiers and cavalry, and elephants and
cars, stayeth on the field, desirous of battling for thy sake. The heroic
Srutayu and Srutayudha, and Citrangada and Citravarman, those foremost of
men, those proud warriors capable of smiting effectually and possessed of
sureness of aim, stay on the field, desirous of battle. The high-souled
Satyasandha, the son of Karna, stayeth on the field, desirous of battle.
Two other sons of Karna, possessing a knowledge of high weapons and
endued with great lightness of hands, are both staying, O king, at the
head of forces that are large and incapable of being pierced by warriors
of little energy, desirous of battling for thy sake. Accompanied by these
heroes and by many other foremost of warriors, O king, that are possessed
of immeasurable might, the Kuru king (Duryodhana) is staying like a
second Indra in the midst of his elephant division in expectation of
victory!'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'Thou hast told me duly all that are alive both
amongst us and the foe. From this I plainly see on which side the victory
will be. Indeed, it may be inferred from the facts.'"

Vaishampayana continued, "While saying this, Dhritarashtra the son of
Ambika, having learnt that only a small portion of his army was alive,
for all his foremost of warriors had died, felt his heart to be
exceedingly agitated by grief. The king swooned away. Partially restored
to his senses, he addressed Sanjaya, saying, 'Wait for a moment!' And the
king said, 'O son, having heard of this dire calamity, my heart is
greatly agitated. My senses are being stupefied, and my limbs are about
to be paralysed!' Having said these words, Dhritarashtra the son of
Ambika, that lord of earth, lost his senses and fell down on the earth."



8

Janamejaya said, "Having heard of Karna's fall and the slaughter of his
sons, what, O foremost of regenerate ones, did the king say, after he had
been a little comforted? Indeed, poignant was the grief that he
experienced, arising from the calamity that befell his sons! Tell me, I
ask thee, all that the king said on that occasion!"

Vaishampayana said, "Hearing of the slaughter of Karna that was
incredible and astounding, that was dreadful and capable of paralysing
the senses of all creatures, that looked like the downfall of Meru, or a
never-to-be-believed clouding of the intellect of the wise Shukra, or the
defeat of Indra of terrible feats at the hands of his foes, or the
falling down on the Earth of the resplendent Sun from the firmament, or a
scarcely-to-be-comprehended drying up of the ocean, that receptacle of
inexhaustible waters, or the annihilation, perfectly astounding, of the
earth, the firmament, the points of the compass, and the waters, or the
fruitlessness of acts both virtuous and sinful, king Dhritarashtra,
having earnestly reflected for some time on it, thought that his army had
been annihilated. Thinking that other creatures also, as unslayable as
Karna, would meet with a similar fate, king Dhritarashtra the son of
Ambika, scorched with grief and sighing like a snake, with limbs almost
palsied, long breaths, highly cheerless, and filled with melancholy,
began to lament, saying, 'Oh!' and 'Alas!' And the king said, 'O Sanjaya,
the heroic son of Adhiratha was endued with the prowess of the lion or
the elephant! His neck was as thick as that of a bull, and his eyes,
gait, and voice were like the bull's! Of limbs as hard as the
thunderbolt, that young man, like a bull never flying away from a bull,
never desisted from battle even if his foe happened to be the great Indra
himself! At the sound of his bow-string and palms and at the whizz of his
arrowy showers men and steeds and cars and elephants fled away from
battle. Relying upon that mighty-armed one, that slayer of large bands of
foes, that warrior of unfading glory, Duryodhana had provoked hostilities
with those mighty car-warriors, the sons of Pandu! How then could Karna,
that foremost of car-warriors, that tiger among men, that hero of
irresistible onset, be forcibly slain by Partha in battle? Relying on the
might of his own arms, he always disregarded Keshava of unfading glory,
and Dhananjaya, and the Vrishnis, and all other foes! Often did he use to
say unto the foolish, avaricious crestfallen, kingdom-coveting, and
afflicted Duryodhana even such words as these, "Alone, I shall, in
battle, throw down from their foremost of cars, those two invincible
warriors united together, the wielder of sarnga and the wielder of
gandiva!" He had subjugated many invincible and mighty foes--the
Gandharas, the Madrakas, the Matsyas, the Trigartas, the Tanganas, the
Khasas, the Pancalas, the Videhas, the Kulindas, the Kasi-kosalas, the
Suhmas, the Angas, the Nishadhas, the Pundras, the Kichakas, the Vatsas,
the Kalingas, the Taralas, the Asmakas, and the Rishikas. Subjugating all
these brave races, by means of his keen and whetted arrows equipped with
kanka feathers, that foremost of car-warriors, Radha's son, had caused
all of them to pay tribute to us for the aggrandisement of Duryodhana.
Alas, how could that warrior acquainted with celestial weapons, that
protector of armies, Karna the son of Vikartana, called also Vrisha, of
mighty energy, be slain in battle by his foes, the heroic and mighty sons
of Pandu? As Indra is the foremost of gods, Karna was the foremost of
men. In the three worlds no third person has been heard of by us to be
like them. Amongst steeds, Uccaisravas is the foremost; amongst Yakshas,
Vaishravana is the foremost; amongst celestials, Indra is the foremost;
amongst smiters, Karna was the foremost. Unvanquished by even the most
heroic and the mightiest of monarchs, he had, Duryodhana's
aggrandisement, subjugated the whole earth. The ruler of Magadha, having
by conciliation and honours obtained Karna for a friend, had challenged
all the Kshatriyas of the world, except the Kauravas and the Yadavas, to
battle. Hearing that Karna hath been slain by Savyasaci in single combat,
I am plunged in an ocean of woe like a wrecked vessel in the vast deep!
Indeed, hearing that that foremost of men, that best of car-warriors,
hath been slain in single combat, I am sinking in an ocean of grief like
a person without a raft in the sea! When, O Sanjaya, I do not die of such
grief, I think my heart is impenetrable and made of something harder than
the thunderbolt. Hearing of the defeat and humiliation of kinsmen and
relatives and allies, who else in the world, O Suta, save my wretched
self, would not yield up his life? I desire to have poison or fire or a
fall from the summit of a mountain, I am unable, O Sanjaya, to bear this
heavy load of grief!'"



9

"Sanjaya said, 'The world regards thee to be equal to Yayati the son of
Nahusha, in beauty, birth, fame, asceticism, and learning! Indeed, in
learning, thou art, O king, like a great rishi, highly accomplished and
crowned with success! Summon thy fortitude! Do not yield to grief!'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'I think destiny is supreme, and exertion fruitless
since even Karna, who was like a shala tree, hath been slain in battle!
Having slaughtered Yudhishthira's army and the large throngs of the
Pancala car-warriors, having scorched all the points of the compass by
means of his arrowy showers, having stupefied the Parthas in battle like
the wielder of the thunderbolt stupefying the asuras, alas, how could
that mighty car-warrior, slain by the foe, fall down on the earth like a
large tree uprooted by the tempest? Indeed, I do not behold the end of my
sorrows like a drowning man unable to see the end of the ocean. My
anxieties are increasing, I do not desire to live, hearing of Karna's
death and Phalguni's victory! Indeed O Sanjaya, I regard the slaughter of
Karna to be highly incredible. Without doubt, this hard heart of mine is
made of the essence of adamant, for it does not burst into a 1,000
fragments upon hearing of the fall of Karna! Without doubt, the gods
ordained, before (my birth), a very long life for me, since sore
distressed on hearing of the death of Karna, I do not die! Fie, O
Sanjaya, on this life of one that is destitute of friends. Brought today,
O Sanjaya, to this wretched plight, miserably shall I have to live, of
foolish understanding that I am, pitied by all! Having formerly been the
honoured of the whole world, how shall I, O Suta, live, overridden by
foes? From pain to greater pain and calamity, have I come, O Sanjaya, in
consequence of the fall of Bhishma and Drona and the high-souled Karna! I
do not see that anyone (of my army) will escape with life when the Suta's
son hath been slain in battle! He was the great raft, O Sanjaya, to my
sons! That hero, having shot innumerable arrows, hath been slain in
battle! What use have I of life, without that bull among men? Without
doubt, the son of Adhiratha, afflicted with arrows, fell down from his
car, like a mountain-peak riven by the fall of thunder! Without doubt,
bathed in blood, he lieth, adorning the Earth, like an elephant slain by
an infuriate prince of elephants! He who was the strength of the
Dhartarashtras, he who was an object of fear to the sons of Pandu, alas,
he viz., Karna, that pride of all bowman, hath been slain by Arjuna! He
was a hero, a mighty bowman, the dispeller of the fears of my sons! Alas,
that hero, reft of life, lieth (on the earth), like mountain struck down
by Indra! The fulfilment of Duryodhana's wishes is even like locomotion
to one that is lame, or the gratification of the poor man's desire, or
stray drops of water to one that is thirsty! Planned in one way, our
schemes end otherwise. Alas, destiny is all powerful, and time incapable
of being transgressed! Was my son Duhshasana, O Suta, slain, while flying
away from the field, humbled (to the dust), of cheerless soul, and
destitute of all manliness? O son, O Sanjaya, I hope he did no dastardly
act on that occasion? Did not that hero meet with his death like the
other kshatriyas that have fallen? The foolish Duryodhana did not accept
Yudhishthira's constant advice, wholesome as medicine, against the
propriety of battle. Possessed of great renown, Partha, when begged for
drink by Bhishma then lying on his arrowy bed, pierced the surface of the
earth! Beholding the jet of water caused by the son of Pandu, the
mighty-armed (Bhishma, addressing Duryodhana), said, "O sire, make peace
with the Pandavas! Hostilities ceasing, peace will be thine! Let the war
between thyself and thy cousins end with me! Enjoy the earth in
brotherliness with the sons of Pandu!" Having disregarded those counsels,
my child is certainly repenting now. That has now come to pass which
Bhishma of great foresight said. As regards myself, O Sanjaya, I am
destitute of counsellors and reft of sons! In consequence of gambling, I
am fallen into great misery like a bird shorn of its wings! As children
engaged in sport, O Sanjaya, having seized a bird and cut off its wings,
merrily release it, but the creature cannot achieve locomotion in
consequence of its winglessness; even so have I become, like a bird shorn
of its wings! Weak, destitute of every resource, without kinsmen and
deprived of relatives and friends, cheerless and overpowered by enemies,
to which point of the compass shall I go? He who vanquished all the